---
layout: post
title: Theory of Success
---

Often I have found that I am measuring myself against borrowed yardsticks:  adopting someone else's notion of success. In February 2017, I decided that I would change that. I wanted to study happiness, success and human emotion from a scientific standpoint. I enrolled in an online course, [Success](https://www.coursera.org/learn/wharton-succcess/). I have nothing but praise for this course. The course made me think and introspect. It asked thought provoking questions which helped me truly understand myself, from my innate motivations to my goals when I was a child. Based on many hours of thinking, I can define a single coherent theory of success as it applies to me. It is a deeply personal definition, which will likely be revisited time and again as I grow in age and wisdom. 
 
Success for me comprises three aspects.

1. Uniqueness: I have always believed that every human being has a purpose: something they can do that brings value to the rest of the world. [Where are your diamonds](https://www.coursera.org/learn/wharton-succcess/lecture/ehwTJ/where-are-your-diamonds) was one lecture that helped clarify this aspect. Prof. Shell presents a very compelling story of [Julia Child](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_Child). I obtained the below excerpt from the lessons' transcript.  

>> So, Julia Child's started out as a writer. She studied writing when she was in college. She graduated and went to work as an ad writer in New York and she loved writing, but she wasn't actually very good at writing just as a writer. And so, she ended up deciding to quit and she went off on a journey that were war came about. She became involved in helping with what was we call it the CIA now, but it was sort of the Security Services and the Defense Intelligence Services. And so she got really good and realized she had a capability at aggregating lots of data and different perspectives, then she found her husband also during the war. He happened to be a gourmet cook and introduced her to fine food, and French cooking. They lived in Paris, she found that she had a real aptitude for cooking. So now, notice what happens. She's a good writer. She's good at aggregating lots of data and now she likes cooking. And as she began to put all these together, she was a pretty good writer. Pretty good cook. Pretty good aggregator, but a cook who can write an aggregate data and put together a really amazing world class cook book that's written really well. That's more unusual. So, she then became a celebrity cook book writer from putting these three things together and the final stage of her career was sort of an accident. One day, she was living in Boston and a TV show that had a cooking show on it. There regular chef was sick or something and she new the person who was the producer and they called and said, could you help us out? And they put her on TV and she had always liked to be the ham at the party. She always liked to be the person who cut up and made jokes and was the sort of clown of the party and she brought that instinct, which is just another capability, which standing alone is nothing. Add that to being someone who can cook and then you have a comedian celebrity chef, the first one in American culture and she became a legend. So that's what happens when you aggregate aptitudes, which each one alone is nothing special. But when you put them all together and you're doing something that people pay you for that causes all four of these to work in harmony in a special circumstance, bingo. It's really special. So, you're just looking in there for the aptitudes and the skills that are genuine.

In exactly the same fashion, my theory of success involves aggregating new and existing skills, with innate abilities to find those specific areas and make unique contributions to them. 

2. Impact: Given how transient human life is, I feel that it is important to try and impact as many other human lives as deeply and broadly as possible. Impact may be achieved in different ways, ideological (by being a politician), material (a great philanthropist) or technological (improvement to quality of life that lasts beyond one's own lifetime). To be remembered for my contributions long after my death is a necessary condition for me to call myself a success.

3. Philanthropy: Another important aspect of success for me is helping people in need. In my thinking there is no greater form of inequality that exists in the world than unequal opportunity. Many people who are born in a less than ideal place, in war torn countries, in conditions of difficulty do not get the same opportunities to succeed that some others do. Helping people has a multiplicative effect because they will likely help even more people. I would not call my life a success if I cannot do my part to address this fundamental inequality. 

Of course each of the steps outlined is contingent on my continued living, and several other external factors which are partially or completely outside my control. It would be naïve to assume that simply defining success is sufficient. However, I perceive this definition as a necessary first step towards the long term goal of leading a fulfilling life. 

